1.(3+3+2+2=10 pts) Bias-Variance Trade-off of LASSO
While it is hard to write the explicit formula for the bias and variance of using
LASSO, we can quantify the expected general trend. Make sure you justify the
answers to the following questions for full points:
(a) (Written) What is the general trend of the bias asλincreases?
(b) (Written) What about the general trend of the variance asλincreases?
(c) (Written) What is the bias atλ= 0?
(d) (Written) What about the variance atλ=∞?
2.(2×4+4+3+4+3+6+4=32 pts) Spam classification using Naive Bayes
and Standard Logistic Regression
Consider the email spam dataset, which contains 4601 e-mail messages that have
been split into 3000 training (spam.train.dat) and 1601 test emails (spam.test.dat).
57 features have been extracted with a binary label in the last column. You can read
more about the data at the UCI repository (http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/SMS+Spam+Collection).
The features are as follows:
•48 continuous real [0,100] attributes of type word freq WORD = percentage of
words in the e-mail that match WORD, i.e. 100 * (number of times the WORD
appears in the e-mail) / total number of words in e-mail. A “word” in this
case is any string of alphanumeric characters bounded by non-alphanumeric
characters or end-of-string.
•6 continuous real [0,100] attributes of type char freq CHAR = percentage of
characters in the e-mail that match CHAR, i.e. 100 * (number of CHAR
occurrences) / total characters in e-mail
•1 continuous real [1,...] attribute of type capital run length average = average
length of uninterrupted sequences of capital letters
•1 continuous integer [1,...] attribute of type capital run length longest = length
of longest uninterrupted sequence of capital letters
•1 continuous integer [1,...] attribute of type capital run length total = sum of
length of uninterrupted sequences of capital letters = total number of capital
letters in the e-mail
•1 nominal 0,1 class attribute of type spam = denotes whether the e-mail was
considered spam (1) or not (0), i.e. unsolicited commercial e-mail.
All the specified functions should be in the file ‘q2.py’.
(a) (Code) You will explore the effects of feature preprocessing and its impact on
Naive Bayes and Standard (unregularized) logistic regression. Write the follow-
ing functions to preprocess your data. You are free to use thesklearn.preprocessing
module. Note that they are independent of one another and should not build
on each step. You should assume only the features are passed in and not the
target and the function should return the preprocessed train and test set in
numpy 2D array format (i.e., two return values).
1
i. Write a Python functiondo nothing(train, test)that takes a train
and test set and does no preprocessing.
ii. Write a Python functiondo std(train, test)that standardizes the
columns so they all have mean 0 and unit variance. Note that you want
to apply the transformation you learned on the training data to the test
data. In other words, the test data may not have a mean of 0 and unit
variance.
iii. Write a Python functiondo log(train, test)that transforms the fea-
tures using log(x ij + 0.1) or a smoothed version of the natural logarithm.
iv. Write a Python functiondo bin(train, test)that binarize the features
using⊮ (xij >0) (Note that 1 denotes the indicator function). In other words,
if the feature has a positive value, the new feature is a 1 otherwise a 0.
(b) (Code) Write a Python functioneval nb(trainx, trainy, testx, testy)
that fits a Naive Bayes model to the training. You can usesklearn.naivebayes
module for this part. The function should return as a dictionary containing the
accuracy and AUC for the training and test sets and the predicted probabili-
ties for the test set using the following keys: ‘train-acc’, ‘train-auc’, ‘test-acc’,
‘test-auc’, ‘test-prob’. The values for accuracy and AUC are expected to be
numeric values, while test-prob is expected to be either a list or a numpy 1-d
array with the predicted probability for the test set.
(c) (Written) Fit a Naive Bayes model to each of the four preprocessing steps above
using the code in 2b. Each preprocessing should be performedindependently
(i.e., use each of the functions you created in 2a on the original dataset).
Report the accuracy rate and AUC on the training and test sets across the 4
preprocessing steps in a table.
(d) (Code) Write a Python functioneval lr(trainx, trainy, testx, testy)
that fits a standard (no regularization) logistic regression model. The function
should return a dictionary containing the accuracy and AUC for the training
and test sets and the predicted probabilities for the test set using the following
keys: ‘train-acc’, ‘train-auc’, ‘test-acc’, ‘test-auc’, ‘test-prob’. Note that the
values for accuracy and AUC should be numeric values, while test-prob should
either be a list or a numpy 1-d array with the predicted probability for the
test set. The output will be the same format as 2b.
(e) (Written) Fit a standard (no regularization) logistic regression model to each
of the four preprocessing steps above using the code in 2d. Report the accuracy
rate and AUC on the training and test sets for the 4 preprocessing steps in a
table.
(f) (Written) Plot the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for the test
data. You should generate 3 plots:
•One plot containing the 4 Naive Bayes model curves representing each of
the preprocessing steps.
•One plot containing the 4 logistic regression model curves representing
each of the preprocessing steps.
•One plot containing the best Naive Bayes model and the best logistic
regression model curve.
2
(g) (Written) Given your results in 2c, 2e, and 2f, comment on how the preprocess-
ing affects the models (logistic and Naive Bayes) with regards to ROC, AUC,
and accuracy. Also, comment on how Naive Bayes compares with logistic
regression.
3.(2+4+5+5+8+1+6+8+5+6+4+4=54 pts) Exploring Model Selection
Strategies for Logistic Regression with Regularization
We will be using the SPAM dataset from the previous part for this problem. You can
preprocess the data however you see fit, either based on the results of the previous
problem or by introducing another preprocessing method. The only requirement
is that it is consistent throughout the rest of this problem. For this problem, you
are not allowed to use thesklearn.model selectionmodule. All the specified
functions should be in the file ‘q3.py’.
(a) (Written) How did you preprocess the data for this method? Why?
(b) (Code) Implement the Python functiongenerate train val(x, y, valsize)
that given the validation size splits the data randomly into train and valida-
tion splits. The function should return a dictionary with the following keys:
‘train-x’, ‘train-y’, ‘val-x’, ‘val-y’. The values for ‘train-x’ and ‘val-x’ are ex-
pected to be numpy 2d arrays of the same dimension as x, and split into the
associated training and validation features. The values for ‘train-y’ and ‘val-y’
are expected to be a subset of y split accordingly. Note that each time this
function is run, the splits are likely to be different.
(c) (Code) Implement the Python functiongenerate kfold(x, y, k)that given
the k, will split the data into k-folds. The function should return a single
numpy 1-d array with the k that it belongs to (e.g., array([0,1,2,. . . ,2,1,1]))
for k=3.
(d) (Code) Implement the Python functioneval holdout(x, y, valsize, logistic)
which takes in the input (e.g., 3000 training samples fromspam.train.dat),
the input labels, and the validation size and (1) uses 3b to split x and y into
train and validation, and (2) evaluates the performance using the instanti-
ated logistic regression model. You can assume the logistic regression classi-
fier will be created usingsklearn.linear model.LogisticRegression. Your
function should report a dictionary containing the accuracy and AUC for the
training and validation sets using the following keys: ‘train-acc’, ‘train-auc’,
‘val-acc’, ‘val-auc’.
(e) (Code) Implement the Python functioneval kfold(x, y, k, logistic)which
takes in k, (1) uses 3c to split the data, and (2) evaluates the performance using
the instantiated in the logistic regression model. You can assume the logistic
regression classifier will be created usingsklearn.linear model.LogisticRegression.
Your function should report a dictionary containing the accuracy and AUC for
the training and validation sets using the following keys: ‘train-acc’, ‘train-
auc’, ‘val-acc’, ‘val-auc’. The accuracy and AUC for this part should be a
single number (e.g., how you aggregate across the k folds).
(f) (Written) What is your regularization parameter search space for ridge and
LASSO-regularized logistic regression?
3
(g) (Written) For your regularization parameter search space specified in 3f, fit
ridge and LASSO using 3d by searching over a variety of split ratios. For each
unique split ratio, report the validation metrics (AUC and accuracy). What is
the best ‘parameter’ for ridge and LASSO based on these metrics? Note ridge
and LASSO may have different optimal ‘parameters’.
(h) (Written) For your regularization parameter search space specified in 3f, fit
ridge and LASSO using the k-fold cross-validation approach by searching over
k= 2,5,10. For each value ofk, specify the best ‘parameter’ based on the
metrics.
(i) (Code) Implement the Python functioneval mccv(x, y, valsize, s, logistic)
that takes in the validation size and the sample sizesand uses the Monte
Carlo cross-validation approach withssamples (i.e., use the validation/hold-
out technique from 3dstimes). The output is expected to be the same format
as 3d and 3e.
(j) (Written) Fit ridge and LASSO using the Monte Carlo Cross-validation ap-
proach withs= 5,10 samples and different split ratios. What is the best
‘parameter’ based on the splits and the samples?
(k) (Written) Using the optimal parameters identified in 3g, 3h, and 3j, re-train
the regularized logistic regression model using all the training data and report
the performance on the test set in terms of AUC and accuracy in a table. Note
that this means you are likely training at least 6 different regularized models
and reporting the performance for each of the model.
(l) (Written) Comment on how the different model selection techniques compare
with one another with regard to AUC and accuracy, the robustness of the
validation estimate, and the computational complexities of the three different
hold-out techniques.
4
